he was answering a question that had
always wondered
when am I gonna die
it was like oh it's now
would you please welcome Richard how Ard
BBC Top Gear presenter Grand Tour
presenter one for the biggest TV shows
in history and it's fair to say that he
has the best job in the world
be funny quicker
every compensatory measure that anybody
who's diminutive in height has ever made
I've done it's one of the reasons I'm a
broadcaster now sure there's a cost to
that though yeah what's the cost
was there a Moment In the Journey of top
game where you thought yourself this is
big we went out in front of 60 000
people and just before we went out I
said that have three guys with less
Talent ever gone out in front of more
people
is there any guilt associated with your
success yeah there is I want to prove
I'm not a lucky idiot so I took some
risky decisions have you ever pondered
that you might might have overdone it
Richard Hammond has been seriously
injured in a car crash they had called
Mindy in they said I think we're losing
him I had very bad post-traumatic
Amnesia of like a one minute memory wow
I have to consciously write memories
down and work hard to recall them you
worry about that
I did the damage was done we should
probably have a look find out
are you scared to find out
yeah
I just want to start this episode with a
message of thanks a thank you to
everybody that Tunes in to listen to
this podcast by doing so you've enabled
me to live out my dream but also for
many members of our team to live out
their dreams too it's one of the
greatest privileges I could never have
dreamed of or imagined in my life to get
to do this to get to learn from these
people to get to have these
conversations to get to interrogate them
from a very selfish perspective trying
to solve problems I have in my life so I
feel like I owe you a huge thank you for
being here and for listening to these
episodes and for making this platform
what it is can I ask you a favor I can't
tell you how much you can change the
course of this podcast the the course of
the guests were able to invite to the
show and to the course of everything
that we do here just by doing one simple
thing and that simple thing is hitting
that subscribe button helps this channel
more than I could ever explain the
guests on this platform are incredible
because so many of you have hit that
button and I know when we think about
what we want to do together over the
next year on this show a lot of it is
going to be fueled by the amount of you
that are subscribed in that tune in this
show every week so thank you let's keep
doing this and I can't wait to see what
this year brings for this show for us as
a community and for this platform
[Music]
Richard
can we start by you giving me your
your context your earliest context where
uh yep little fella born in Birmingham
uh mum and dad I'm the eldest of Three
Brothers
um quite a close knit family my mum's
dad worked in the car industry he was a
coach Builder so he's trained as a
cabinet maker working with wood then he
went into coach building which is in the
old days when cars had a steel chassis
and then they'd have an ash usually
wooden frame over the top so that's
where he started because his cabinet
making skills were relevant but then he
stayed within the car industry and
finished up working at Jensen so cars
were always
they were always in my imagination
they weren't like littering the drive
because you know we had modest means so
we had a purple Marina Coupe as a best
car
um but I loved them
and that that grew into an obsession
yeah so schooled there until 15 and then
we moved North as a family uh and I went
to rip and grammar school up in the
north and from there started working
radio in 1988. that's a long time ago
isn't it yes I wasn't alive back then
yes thank you so much
we've already just as I was coming in we
mentioned that the fact that I talk
regularly to like full-grown adults like
important people you do lots of
important stuff and there's oh yeah I
love your show I used to watch it when I
was a little kid yeah I've done it that
long
you've led a life that is a real anomaly
in many respects you know you've done
some unbelievable things that people
would just dream of doing when when you
when I think back in my own life I try
and pinpoint the moments of influence
whether it was a TV show I watched or
something that happened For Better or
For Worse like you said with your dad
and his his um love for cars that made
me end up living a life that was a
little bit different when you think
about those things and why you why you
became an anomaly what are those
anomalous influences see my favorite
game is to look back and pretend they
were all part of some great plan yeah
and thread them all together but you can
only do that in retrospect for me I
guess
um I always liked expression I wanted to
be a painter or I wanted to draw really
well I loved art at school I loved
English I loved writing
um but I loved photography when I was
about
10 improvise a little dark room under
the stairs and print my own black and
white photographs so I loved all of that
but I was very much things like that
were for other people
I think it was a Birmingham thing
is
I've always had to but brummies don't go
wow
your average brummy will never go wow
they'll go that's no I mean my dedics
could run like that only bigger it's
just something we do we don't we don't
profess to we don't do that and you kind
of need to be able to do that to then
think that's what I might pursue it's a
key moment
am I making this up as being a key
moment I don't know it feels like it
when I was eight something like that
nine
um my dad's parents lived in Western
Superman
so we'd go on holiday there which meant
an endless drive from Birmingham yes
before the motorway went all the way so
um I wasn't alive yeah yeah that's gonna
be a theme
um we we went all the way down to
Western Superman to see them and we were
walking along the front there there's a
low sea wall on the beach down here on
my right and I saw there was a bit of a
fuffle going on a bit later on me looked
over the wall well a lot of people
gathered around and some people holding
things and in the middle it was Derek
Griffiths presenter
who was doing a piece of camera and
there was a camera there and I remember
thinking that's amazing he's been so
animated and talking to that thing
there's nobody there but he's talking to
it he's engaging with it instead almost
pulling a response out of it and I think
that was I didn't leave that experience
going that's it I've got to be a
television presenter because that was
for other people
just as being a photographer was for
other people or an artist
but it was there in my heart that's when
I thought I'd love to I bet that feels
amazing
what was for you if that was for other
people what did you think was for you
I don't know
I guess it I
I would never have imagined
anything that I've done
happening to me
none of it
um for me was
just
see I'm that bit older than you
and possibly there's a generation that
we're raised by people who were glad to
have got through the war
and for whom what they really wanted was
just a quiet life with nobody trying to
kill them or their parents or their
loved ones so I wonder if there's Echoes
of that and I think that was maybe still
echoing around Birmingham that what you
really wanted was just to make sure
everything's okay just to look
everything everybody's all right we can
have family life and we can just
progress without making a fuss
sticking your head over the parapet
because that brings risk
um to avoid that don't
so I I never would have
dreamed I'm saying I was directionless
had I asked you about 18 or 16 what are
you going to be when you grow up what
would you have replied do you think
16 out of replied
I just want to write my moped
um I'd have wanted to be an artist
a great painter but had taken no
meaningful steps towards it at all
because again lacked confidence
um
yeah I was sort of
that would only have happened if a
miracle had occurred do you know what I
mean if you have an option that you're
not actually pursuing actively because
you think that's not funny but I'll keep
it in there admittedly what I'm saying
it's like I was hoping to win the
lottery but I wasn't doing the lottery
but it it it it feels like that but by
18 I just said I want to be in radio
and ultimately TV
and that's what ends up happening right
you go and study yeah well I'd sat at my
o levels under a different examination
board and a different syllabus from that
under which I'd studied and then I I
went into sixth form
but it reached a point of entity when
the teaching staff
thought it might be better if I went
somewhere else
literally anywhere else just not there
just don't be they chucked me out but
not for anything heroic
but that wasn't one of those yes I set
fire to the janitor's car or something I
just was annoying
I was an irritant
um and I wasn't focusing so they slung
me out what do you mean like when you
say annoying you mean oh God just
winding the teachers up or something
yeah
trying to be funny
um
every compensatory measure that anybody
who's diminutive in height has ever made
I've done only discovered recently that
one of my dearest friends Zog Ziegler
whom I've known for 30 odd years
um he's 20 years older than me in emails
referring to me to other people he
copied me into one by accident about 10
years ago he always calls me little
Napoleon
he looked a bit
but he still does yeah I exhibited all
of those traits I was just irritating
honestly really annoying do you know why
uh because I was conscious of being you
know smaller than everybody else and I
wanted to be a bigger noise in the room
I wanted to sort of
disrupt and do stuff but I didn't want
to be naughty I had no I still hate
being in trouble
I hate being in trouble
um it bothers me and it did then but I
was just honestly I wouldn't have put up
with me you know there's like a
stereotype that that if you're smaller
in stature that your you're you're
really ins you're insecure that it
becomes almost like a shame or an
insecurity as a young man and then you
kind of you act against that by
exhibiting certain behaviors was that
true for you was there ever like a shame
of being smaller it was
yeah I guess you don't really it's not
something you crave although I've spoken
to lots of tall people who often wish
and and had a similarly difficult time
as a child because you're always
sticking out the crowd you don't always
want to and you can't make yourself
small
um it genuinely doesn't trouble me now I
mean the truth of the matter is often
when I meet people for the first time
and if they've seen me on the telly
there's a moment and they're
disappointed because they're expected to
meet something that you'd hang on a
Christmas tree or put on the mantelpiece
but I'm actually what five seven ish so
I'm fairly average really it's just that
I consistently work with much taller
people but it yeah it did drive me on as
a kid and I do it's bullying I've never
bleeded about it but it is and it it
influenced me greatly yeah yeah it it
I overcompensated I felt I had to
it's almost like you take that as a kid
I mean you take that into the room with
you anything that makes you different
whatever that is you take that in the
room with you and it's kind of you have
to deal with it and you have to deal
with it
you have to compensate for it be funnier
or be quicker or be angrier or noisier
or naughty you have to somehow
compensate with this thing which is to
do with I guess if you could bring that
thing with you into a room and it was
simply absorbed and it didn't matter
then you could be the person behind all
of that so yeah I think it did it's one
of the reasons I'm a broadcaster now for
sure really yeah bound to be must be
must be I've often thought really
if you're lucky enough it depends people
seldom have careers now
as broadcasters as I think of it because
their personalities and that's a
different game
but I come from an era when it was a
craft
you know I I spent a long time learning
about how to address an audience through
radio you never pluralize the audience
you talk to people one-on-one
um all sorts of things and those craft
skills have gone and they've gone from
TV there is that a bad or a good thing I
don't know if actually we're getting to
see people genuinely as they are if
we're celebrating interesting
personalities rather than somebody who
simply learned to craft maybe that's
better
but I I was pushed to do it I think in
part by that and I've often said that
the worst people to pursue it as in the
worst people to deal with the trappings
of success in the media
are by definition the same ones who are
the only ones driven enough to achieve
it because they're compensating so amen
that's why it can be damaging because
only the man or woman who was so
desperate for it will have hung on and
endured
sacrificing friends and time and spare
time and sometimes dignity and whatever
else in order to get there and they're
therefore the least able to deal with it
when whatever it was that they craved is
given them
but they'll be better off solving the
craving
removing the craving than feeding it
that's my theory
I said this to my girlfriend yesterday
and he did bed at 1am yeah
you said the point about how people that
strive to have the admiration let's call
it or the the success whatever the sort
of external validation is maybe a
broader way to kind of describe that
are also the ones that once they get it
will struggle the most to deal with it
whether it's because of the the scrutiny
that comes with it or the or the you
know the power that comes with it or
whatever that comes with it and so
that's just my exact point that's
exactly it yeah and we agree I think
it's and it's not
it's fairly obvious when you see it that
way
I'm not against
all of that I'm not a you know we live
in that world where people can project
their personalities across all across
the world
um that doesn't trouble me overly even
if it does trouble means occasionally
I'll meet a young person a kid and
they'll say oh yes great I love what you
do I'd love to be famous and I'll always
stop at that I always really
why
because you know it's it's a it's a
byproduct
of a fascinating and potentially
rewarding job and it can be important it
can be
powerful even but the fame itself is
just it just means it's embarrassing
standing on a train on your own because
everybody's staring at you
that's me that's all it means I guess if
you live in London and go out a lot it
might mean you can get a restaurant
table but you can only get that if you
remember hi I'm kind of a big deal off
the television can I ever tell you okay
and then you feel even worse when you
come
were you aware that you were being
driven by so that's some kind of like
insecurity throughout that period or was
it really in hindsight that you look
back and go ah
um was I aware yeah I think I was yeah
I mean I learned to fight early on I
learned to punch above my weight to make
a noise to be brave or if there's some
idiot on his bicycle trying to jump over
some action man toys on a ramp it'll be
me
yeah I knew
I knew that was I was a small kid just
screaming Notice Me Notice Me notice me
I think
and and the problem there of course
a lot of us don't we will have traits
that aren't always the best but that are
rooted in
justifiable cause
but if your job then rewards it if you
are
needily showing off my mummy stopped
showing off sorry that's my childhood
um but if you're then rewarded for it
wait a minute your brain is sort of
remapped a little bit to go oh so that
isn't a bad thing I should pursue that
because I literally am rewarded
financially and people seem to like me
so I'll continue doing it it's when my
midlife crisis has lasted 20 years and
it's still going on
I'm quite enjoying it
I am I cut you know maybe 10 20 episodes
ago on this podcast I I started because
I'd heard similar themes in my guests
that they were being
they were all Mis describing themselves
as being dragged by an insecurity and I
was I started to make this kind of
distinction between being driven which
is maybe for intrinsic reasons or
whatever and then being dragged where
there's some kind of Voyager trying to
fill or insecurity you're trying to to
mend or some validation you're seeking
and you know you're either in the front
of the car driving down the middle way
or you're kind of on the end of it being
dragged by this pursuit of like
validation and how at some point in our
lives we probably need to like take hold
of the steering wheel and be conscious
about the direction we're traveling in
and not being dragged by the insecurity
or the desire to be liked whatever it
might be was there a point in your life
where you're you're the thing driving
you
moved from being that that you know
insecurity or that that pursuit to show
off and the validation it creates to
being a little bit more conscious
because I sometimes worry
in myself but also in the conversations
I have that if we don't at some point
realize what's driving us it might drive
us to the wrong place it might drag us
to the wrong place should I say
um initially I don't spent that much
time thinking about it like that because
heck it was work if you're a freelancer
in radio in 1988 89 you go where the job
is and you live in whatever bed so
you've got a living to do it because I
love the job and let's not
I didn't it wasn't it one long
introspective Naval gazing party it was
this is really cool I really enjoy it
and in those days I'd arrive at a new
radio station and
um if I was lucky be given the radio
station car which was often quite a new
car which was
uh and dispatched in that with a viewer
tape recorder which is a reel to reel
quarter inch tape tape recorder that to
you is a steam train it's not like an
iPod so no
it's about 20 years before the iPod it
is honestly it belongs in a museum but
that's what we used so I'd be dispatched
with that to go and do an interview with
no mobile phone to hook up but when I
got there I loved it I still love
harvesting people's thoughts and ideas
and and sharing them
via any medium I mean look at what we
live in now look at what you're doing
what we can do what I do drivetribe that
I now run that is about doing exactly
that
and it's almost
your generation I guess and you know the
agencies that you run and the work that
you do you're that bit further than I am
from
as I'm still closer to still being
amazed I used to have a fantasy when I
was working radio to go and do
interviews again with no mobile phone so
you had to pick up a phone with a curly
wire and make the appointment and you
had to be on time because you couldn't
just turn up and then oh I'll call you
when I get there the window mobile
phones it didn't exist and there was no
internet to research where you're going
so you all Sat Nav so you took a paper
map navigated your way there and you did
your interview you could link up live
with the radio station
but through like a radio mass that you
had to put up
um and then you'd go back and I used to
fantasize about imagine if I could just
go anywhere and do live
broadcasting it's just and the other day
we were having a meeting with
the guys that work with me on Drive
tribe and we were talking about so I'm
not going to tell you because you're
going to do it and you'll take it we've
got a cracking idea for a little show we
want to do on platform and it involves
first of all Lucy one of the people in
the team she's going to go off and do
this thing and we can do it we can link
live you think well what hmm
maybe those of my Generations should
keep hold of that amazement and just
keep it going because it will be I mean
to you that's of course you
I'm still a bit Amazed by that
is that good things are useful
ah
I'm gonna say yeah but I'm only saying
yeah for romantic reasons because
actually it makes no difference at all
the fact is you can practically you can
do what you can do so do it to good
effect
sitting there hopping up and down going
what's amazing that we can do it
probably doesn't help
hmm what do you think
better to be gratitude right there's a
there's a level of gratitude in there
which is a healthy feeling yes there is
I'm grateful that we are able to do that
I'm grateful that we live in a time when
we can come up with an idea sitting in
my barn having a meeting and then just
do it hmm that's amazing and a younger
generation or a generation that haven't
been exposed to the change might not
they just have an expectation that it
happens so there's less gratitude
involved in the Future made them all
grow up like I did exactly with no
mobile phones and just a hoop and a
stick to play with
do you I I do sometimes Ponder if um
that world without the internet my
analog world what would be a much more
enjoyable world for the human being to
live in and it kind of links somewhat
back to what we were talking about
earlier where if you think about the
essence of what it is to be human I
don't think we're supposed to be exposed
to this much information and this much
sort of Global Connection
um in terms of like the bombardment of
notifications and this constant stimulus
which leaves you in that fight or flight
state
maybe the drive to do that is
quintessentially human and it's one of
the reasons we proliferated the way we
have that spreading of gossip and
sharing of information and sharing of
um mutually agreed standards be that
industry Showbiz gossip
or religion or anything else
but sharing those is what's enabled us
to work together in huge numbers
otherwise we would be in little little
individual groups still and together so
it's been key we have to have it it was
inevitable I think it's run away a bit
I think the critical nature of gossip
and sharing all of that because we've
developed this way of doing it but maybe
it'll decrease in import maybe we'll
need bigger spikes in it to actually
grab her attention
but I don't
I don't think we can't condemn it
because we've pursued it's what's come
out of us we have all the options as
well so we need to look at what it will
do for us I think it'll water down it'll
dilute I wonder if the brain has evolved
at the same Pace as it well the BR I
mean it can it is it is
a limitlessly flexible sort of bucket of
soup and electricity isn't it really I
mean I dented mine crashing into the
ground at 320 miles an hour stupid boy
that was typical me I only did that
because I'm a short bloke that is short
bloke all over anybody want to drive
this rocket power dragster me me will
everybody be looking yeah I'll do it and
then it crashed but I you know I did
damage mine and there were all sorts of
anomalies within its ways in which it
didn't work as it should emotional
responses were all over the place no big
motor control issues but some
um but it rewired it fixes and there's
loads of instances of it doing that so
if the brain can recover and literally
physically reshapen and function post
physical trauma then it can also we
could evolve we could be evolving now
will it be genetically encoded and
passed down
so will a new generation following on
from you evolve will they carry
pre-coded
that information to deal with our
Digital World well physiological changes
no
but then as human beings because we have
to have the capacity you might be born
a Wall Street billionaire
um
a fisherman in an Amazonian Village
the same essential ingredients have to
do that we have to have that Limitless
flexibility so maybe that's why our
brain will maybe it'll always retain
that flexibility
which means by definition it can't
evolve in a distinctive route because
that's narrowing options we're still
born with this incredible capacity to be
and do anything within a very broad
range of things and we need to hang on
to that I mean baby all a baby giraffe
has to do is endure a six foot drop when
it's born and be able to run a few
minutes later and you're away that's it
we have to do a lot of other stuff
I wonder I I part of the reason I asked
this question is because I'm trying to
think about
um a lot of the
things we're seeing with mental health
and how it's it appears that situational
and environmental factors are causing of
the modern world are causing the brain
to struggle in many ways um at a
fundamental level whether it's
loneliness that's driving the brain to
feel a sense of
purposelessness or something or whether
it's the overstimulation which is
causing anxiety and the brain is
struggling to cope with that
um that's kind of why I was asking the
question as to whether the brain is
keeping up with the nature of the modern
world
because there seems to be a lot of
symptoms that it isn't but there's only
so many stimuli that can be received and
registered via our various senses and
organs into that lump in there there's
only so many things that could I I think
you might attribute magical qualities to
an analog existence
and you can see why we would because an
analog existence
has a degree of
um
of definition
that couldn't be achieved digitally
because you're always Limited
whereas it's a bit like trying to
explain science and the world
using science trying to explain the
universe using science
it's only the langrification of it it's
not it isn't absolute these aren't the
facts they're aversion of facts that we
can share between us and sharing and
communicating is what we do it's what
defines us so that's all it is it's a
langification of that that is but it
doesn't have the definition it can't go
down to a fine enough it's it's it's
still like trying to paint the Mona Lisa
using Lego bricks it's not quite fine
enough
but I think a digital world is even less
fine because it it's zeros and ones it's
absolutely so yes in in what we do it's
great it returns empirical data on
whether or not something is being
approved of if you're making a marketing
film as opposed to sticking your finger
in their own seeing which way the wind's
blowing and are people looking at that
poster outside the bus station yes but
the poster outside the bus station in
the analog world is has a far finer
level of
of
of detail then I think you could do
digitally but are you attribute are you
saying that it's intrinsically bad that
we're drifting towards a digital world
and away from the analog because the
analog contains something that could
stimuli stimuli
you can replicate we could honeycomb the
entire world
you could be put into a pod into which
you could be given sufficient physical
mental stimuli which isn't it chemicals
um
to maintain what is measurably a healthy
human being would you be I don't know
I guess I'm asserting that like humans
clearly have some fundamental needs you
know shelter connection
um
I was going to say psychological safety
I'm not sure that's necessarily a human
need but it's important and some of
those things seem to be being Stripped
Away by the nature of the world we live
in today where you know in America
when asked how many people have you got
to turn to in a time of Crisis the
answer used to be three then I think
it's the mode modal answer or the medium
answer is now zero Theresa May appointed
the first loneliness star they think
um loneliness is significantly worse
than smoking 20 cigarettes a day reduces
your life expectancy by 10 years and I
wonder whether the that's almost like a
human response to something that's been
Stripped Away From The Way We Live Our
Lives over the last whatever you know
like living in four white walls alone is
a single Bachelor ordering my food using
a glass screen ordering like dating
using a piece of glass stimulating
myself potentially sexually using a
piece of glass screen in my hand and
then the processed food that I'm eating
I'm just wondering and then look you
know the constant stimulation of this
dopamine hit from this glass screen as
well in my hand that's keeping me awake
up at night hurting my sleep and then
keeping me in fight or flight because
I'm nervous about something on this
glass screen you know but if that's the
answer what is the answer to that
because we made it collectively as a
species we have gone that route I mean
I'm not sure we've gone that way well
yeah I'm not saying we've gone that way
we must continue doing that it might
well be that disruptors need to put the
hand up and saying are we sure yes I
must say I I wanted to talk about the
car because I believe that the car is
sort of an expression of some of that
because in that analog world
which all right I'm from
um
you've got those needs so you need
shelter I suppose warmth
food stimulation supplies mate
once you've got Beyond cave a car comes
to represent all of it that's why it's
important
that's why it very quickly became a
symbol because you've got shelter but
what are you going to do staff to death
and die of loneliness and boredom at the
back of your cave now you need to leave
it and get that that you need and
something that can get you there first
to the kill to the mate
to the resources is powerful that's what
the car became you're very passionate
about the role of the car in society
aren't you yes I am because because of
what it represents uh which is
everything other than shelter
um
yeah and here's me getting all poetic
and romantic and dewey-eyed about the
analog well because I think something
that moves you physically corporally
from one place to another that's
powerful because I'm going there I'm
taking my personal my son of the
universe only exists for each of us in
here so I'm taking therefore the
universe with me to wherever it is I'm
going to do whatever it is I'm going to
do and that makes it impossibly exciting
and for that reason I think it'll never
go away
Top Gear
that really was a big thing come on yeah
it was remarkable I'd done car shows I'd
done radio for years
um moved uh to the South to get a job at
Renault in the Press office so I could
get to know the editors of the car shows
which I nearly did one of whom Pete
Baker saves me and gave me a job on
Granada men of Motors making little car
shows
um and then eventually after years and
years and years of doing that I
auditioned for the new Top Gear and got
the job when you got that job did you
what were your expectations of of the
role well initially I cried an openly
champagne in my way oh God yeah it was
just to play it but I'd spend my whole
life trying to do that so it had worked
yeah yeah it was a huge moment
um but we just thought we'll make a car
show
I remember the conversation in White
City BBC h
um
with most of us was before James joined
but the rest of us were all in place and
weirdly some of the people used to work
with now we were all in that room and we
all said right these are the grand rules
of Top Gear
it's about the real world cars that
people really buy no supercars no
foreign travel we're only going to drive
proper cars that people buy in this
country and then didn't ask for it at
all we realized
that's not what people wanted not what
we wanted to make we never made it with
any science or calculation we just made
the best car show we could
and we were lucky things aligned the
world wanted that show three misshapen
blokes
talking about their passion
but I do think you'd have watched that
Pottery Show
I don't care about Pottery at all
but watching people who are so into it
you know the lovely chap cries when
somebody does something it's like wow
watching people engage with indulge or
share their passion is incredibly
compelling whether it's for making
Pottery or baking or dancing it doesn't
matter all cars doesn't matter
I want to know more about why like why
why did people love it you're touching
on some psychological elements there but
what is it what is it doing for the
viewer at home in terms of the what is
it giving them because it's not just
cars oh no no it was it was God we were
still a car show but well we always just
say you don't have to be a partner to
watch it we do that for you I think it
was uh means of Escape but through a
relatable portal
because you could look at all of us
three and let's be honest we're none of
us Brad Pitt uh where none of us
they're pretty good anything really uh
you you could I think people would
always find they'd identify with one of
the three of us and by the little short
squeaky primary one all right the war
graceful long hair slightly fat one all
the really big fat shouting which one am
I which one and you'd fall into one of
those camps and so that would sort of
take you along with us on whatever
eventually we were going on it's why we
ended up making today the big trips
because that's what people liked the
proper Escape
the one thing that troubles me though is
about that
that business about
the subject being important if you're
going to make a TV show a podcast piece
of Internet content whatever about
something the subject leads it has to it
has to have that authenticity and
integrity to it because we the audience
will see when it doesn't and it's a tip
cars for some reason
are always if somebody's going to make a
TV show a piece of Internet content
about this all right do this thing about
cars okay and then they don't get
anybody who knows about cars involved in
making it but you wouldn't do that if it
was baking or dancing or cooking or
sport or football I mean you wouldn't
you'd you'd want that baked in because
it's not so the wrong foot your
consumers your listeners your viewers or
cats them out or show off that you know
more than they do but you can
demonstrate yeah this is real this is
this this is an authentic passion and we
always kept that right at the Forefront
it wasn't big but it was there
even though what we were doing
was ridiculous
often how much of it was
um scripted per se I was I was watching
some some clips earlier on and I was
there were such moments of Brilliance I
was wondering is that like a producer in
their ear telling them to crack that
joke or to like say that to him or is
that just them being comfortable enough
to be really good bits are in the moment
but I mean that's easy to guess isn't it
you're I you'll have said some killer
funny or incredibly moving things in the
moment that's when we do our best work
all of us so we would always devise a
broad
trajectory for the whole thing if we're
making a special it's expensive so we
can't just oh just get a mongolo and see
if some stuff happens you've got to set
something up but you know that's the
minimum you're going to come back with
um and you know the best bits will be
the unplanned bits of course always
was there a Moment In the Journey of Top
Gear where you went where you thought
yourself [__] you know this is really
well this is this is big oh well um
surprise moment was day one
Studio One series one standing in dance
for halt so this is 2002 very early or
maybe 2001 we filmed it I think I can't
remember a long time ago uh standing on
the stage and you know I'd always watch
Top Gear because I loved cars
um and I'd watch Jeremy on it
he's older than me and he was already
doing it and so as we were it was
recording one they played in The Top
Gear theme and my instant response from
inside was oh top gears on brilliant oh
I'm on it I better concentrate
um but yeah there were key moments once
when we were driving three
um
cut price supercars that we'd bought and
we pulled into a petrol station so this
is early days and everybody came out
running to see us and to talk about the
cars and they sort of got that oh what
are you boys doing what are you up to
now and that's when we realized oh hang
on we've created something here it's got
a momentum of its own
which is great
and it really did have a momentum on its
own globally
no idea why honestly none of us have
none of us have it was
just made the best show we could and
next thing we know we're walking out in
front of 30 000 people on stage in South
Africa or Sydney or Hong Kong or all
around the world during the live stages
with with people that loved the show and
we left why we went out in front of 60
000 people in the Polish National
Stadium in Warsaw and just before we
went out on stage I was in The Lads
backstage and we have those earpieces
and microphones so you can only hear
each other otherwise too much noise and
they're all wow there's music playing
we're about to all drive out with some
terrible stunts I usually hadn't
listened to the briefing so there'd be a
crash and just before when I said lads
have three guys with less Talent ever
gone out in front of more people
with this it was just a serendipitous
lining up of a need for a slightly
anarchic approach uh I don't know but um
it was just a Time
okay we went
when we fitted someone asked me on an
interview I did earlier on it was on
Acadia magazine they said is there any
guilt associated with your success and
it's quite a curious question
um and it stunned me into a bit of a
silence guilt how does that question sit
with you is there any guilt same thing
yeah there is it guilt his
it's slightly more refined that it's
almost a why me it's
um yeah because I'm still the little
Birmingham lad that being a photographer
wasn't for me that's for other people I
can't do that I can't actually be a
photographer for real in the Big World
and if somebody had said I could you
know run various businesses and
be a television presenter and no don't
be daft
it's not guilt
it's been conscious of being the
beneficiary of a great deal of luck when
I was younger you go I went through a
phase of yeah but I always you know luck
often lands at two in the morning and
you're the only one still in the radio
station editing so that's well no it's
just luck
it really is because I got people who
started in the same year as me 88.
um and I'm I've got all the lack I took
some
serendipitous decisions
I took some risky decisions you know I
stepped away from my only other job with
a company car back into broadcasting and
took a massive pay cut I took a massive
pay hit when I joined Top Gear
um they were risks but
um
their only risk if they're freely made
given that they were the product of
whatever it was in me that was driving
me to do what I was doing it was already
going to happen
so I'm lucky because not only did that
opportunity come along but earlier in my
life something had happened and equipped
me with a need
to gain whatever it was I stood a chance
of gaining from taking that risk so I
took that risk so it's still it's still
luck
it's still luck somebody else could have
had that same opportunity but they
hadn't been lucky enough on top of that
to have been given that extra impetus to
pursue it and take that risk by
something that happened earlier in their
lives so it's luck
and I've just been very lucky that's a
strange feeling though isn't it to think
that you got to live this life because
of a set of factors that you know you're
born in a certain place in a certain way
and then that created that impetus you
describe and then the The Dominoes that
fell in the decisions you chose to make
because of all of those subsequent
um experiences lands you with this
incredible
job with an incredible level of freedom
it's quite quite can be quite as you say
a why me like feeling you yeah is it
guilt it kind of is it tastes slightly
differently but it is sort of
embarrassment
is it slightly embarrassing is that why
having
God accidentally stepped into so many
luck traps
um
I'm now you know running my my
businesses and
um because that's something I feel I can
say no I did that that wasn't just lucky
I made that happen by consciously taking
Decisions by thinking about it maybe
but then I'm lucky enough to have the
opportunity to do that which I would
never have had so it's all the whole
experiment of my life has been skewed
entirely by those key elements of luck
at those key stages
but
we all have those we're lucky to be
alive and that's easy to say that and it
sounds tried and nonsensical but we are
and for each one of us to experience our
own individual
perception of the universe to live this
experience is so phenomenally lucky so
many millions and billions of things
have to not just have happened but
continue happening for that to be
possible that whether or not whilst
experiencing this miracle of
self-awareness in and of the universe we
also get to go on the Telly driving
about in a car or not it's kind of
irrelevant at the end this having this
conversation being aware of having loved
ones being aware of yourself in the
world being aware of the world all of
that that's the amazing stuff the rest
is just stuff
and that's easy to say for me because
I'm not that worried about my next phone
bill it's a lot harder if you are I get
that and I'm not
I'm not
not failing to be aware of that and
right now for a lot of people
whether or not they get to do a job on
TV driving around in cars
or whether or not they get to to look at
the universe and talk about the idea of
God and love existing or not with their
mates is kind of less important than
they've just had to have a prepaid meter
fitted for their gas so
the answer to that
guilt embarrassment I think carry it
with you maybe learn from it look up
from it occasionally think how can I
what can I
kind of maybe better able to connect
with people
that just that would be useful
what's your opinion of yourself
you know when you what's the this is a
really interesting question but um you
said something which which kind of
brought me to this question about this
idea that maybe that building these
businesses that you have now is another
pursuit of like proving one is worthy I
guess because because of uh sometimes I
want to prove I'm not a lucky idiot
um so what does that say that's why I
said what's your opinion of yourself oh
it's probably I guess for that reason as
I've probably just revealed it's
probably quite low isn't it
um
I'm very conscious of being very lucky I
think uh to describe myself
um
what is the voice in Richard's head say
Richard is who he is what he is he'd
like to be more fair about her life that
troubles me I think fairness and I'm
aware it's desperately unfair
um but also yeah as as with a lot of us
I'm fairly
um
anxious inside
need need to be loved same desperately
um need to be reassured
and one of the dangers and I I should
imagine you'll find this given you know
you're young and enjoying a stellar
career in what our archetypal positions
of power and authority so it's very
likely that the world will look at you
and think well he's the last one that
needs a bit of reassurance and check on
the shoulder and someone to say are you
doing really well well done whereas
actually you do
um and I certainly find that that's
something that I I need I need someone
to acknowledge that um
things are going well and you're taking
advantage of whatever luck comes your
way and you know I love building my
businesses up because I love the fact
that I'm conscious that's other people's
jobs this is their story I'm helping
build if they get working with me at 24
even if they only work with me for five
years when they'll remember that forever
like I remember the first radio stations
I worked out this is their history we're
taking a part in writing so I'm
conscious of that
but at the same time sometimes you just
need someone to roughly hair and go well
done
and that would be nice
yeah
I'm asking you to rough my hair just
because yeah slightly home
it's I guess it's quite curious because
someone would someone looking in might
think well you know Richard's done so
much in his life he must just be
absolutely satisfied and he must be com
feel completely complete and like
there's nothing more else to prove or to
but the the business point you made
sounds like you feel like you have
something to prove there yeah and I'm 53
I'll go another I'll go another go
around in me yeah
like to have
see I don't know when you're thinking
about time off if you've ever got time
off coming out which I shouldn't imagine
is very often and I know it isn't for me
either but when it is I always think
yeah God I'd love to just take a week
and wake up every day and just go for a
run and then maybe ride an old
motorcycle and just really really Revel
in that I don't immediately I am
hideously addicted to work but that's
hardly surprising given that work has
also been self verification and it's
it's the reward that I probably
shouldn't have had so obviously I'm
addicted to that there's a customer yeah
yeah if you're not careful uh your
relationships
um you know my two daughters that
I've made excuses over the years after
sitting in a rainforest filming and to
be a camera operator and maybe it's a
bloke and he's just that his first
children and he's away from home and
he's upset and I've said yeah but you've
got to remember you know you're their
first example
of how to lead a life you can see where
this is going and you know you're going
to come back with amazing Stories and
they're going to look and think wow well
if he can pursue his dreams and do that
I can pursue mine and he'll Inspire them
yeah but they also just were quite
likely to be around
that's a fact
um
yeah I've been able to provide well for
my girls is in Willow
um I wish I'd been there more of course
I do but if I'd been there more we
wouldn't have been where we were
I can our life would be so different
because I've worked sort of in and out
of London for 25 years
and we've lived deliberately out of
London they've been raised in
herefordshire that's their County that's
where they belong my eldest I bumped
into her in London this week she popped
into the flat
and she'd just been out in a pub in
Fulham and pretty much everybody in
there was from her County of Heritage
and she knew them all and that's
important that she can drift around
London and know people or she can drift
around her home county in the same for
willow and that's that's important but
then they've got a bigger view of the
world but they still have a home to go
to and always shall have a have you ever
pondered that you might because I'm a
workholic I've ever done it no no no
yeah well basically I I'm definitely
addicted to work and sometimes and like
just still the pursuit of like building
and creating things and you know success
and I sometimes Ponder in certain
moments it'll just catch me that
this isn't what it's all about and that
I'm like missing the point and going
back to my point earlier I'm being
dragged by a need for validation whereas
I'm going to get to my deathbed be
laying there and go
so I just wish I'd just go and hang out
on a mountain with my partner in Peru a
little bit more and been there you know
for my kids and my dog this but you
didn't and there's no magic in this it's
it's simply what happens is what happens
and that's the way you've gone the way
your collected experience if you imagine
you are the sort of front of a tsunami
of stuff and that's the way it's taken
you that's the way it's taken you
there's good and there's bad within it I
don't
um I never feel actual solid regret
ever
because that's the way it went
I just don't feel it good and bad I'm
not saying this is a good quality but I
just don't feel it and not because I
engineered out of myself I simply don't
feel it because that's that's the way
I've gone it also helps you sort of live
now which is that's a huge part of the
answer you could continue being driven
As You Are by work for the rest of your
life if you're able to be you know
mindfully present and actually
experience it then great all of that
will come into it quick one one of our
sponsors of this podcast blue jeans
recently did some research and they
found that almost a third of companies
are still spending almost a quarter of a
million a year on launching and hosting
virtual and hybrid events this is
obviously Bonkers with blue jeans new
software called events and Studios you
can host these professional world-class
feeling events for a fraction of the
cost so now going forward for all of my
companies and for myself I think we did
our last one in telegram not so long ago
every event I will host will be hosted
on Blue Jeans events and Studios and
I've never seen a software tool that
allows you to personalize and brand an
interface and the interface itself with
such ease that's the real thing about
the the software I've done I think two
events on Blue Jeans events and Studios
the ease of not having to be an expert
to create an unbelievable event if
you've got an event coming up if you've
got a virtual event coming up do me and
yourself a favor and check out blue
jeans events and Studios it's honestly
incredible and I'd love to hear your
responses if you do give it a try you
know I never really usually pick the
chocolate flavored heels my favorite are
the banana flavor I love The Salted
Caramel flavor but recently I think I in
part blame Jack in my team who's
obsessed with the chocolate flavor heals
I've started drinking the chocolate
flavor heels for the first time and I
absolutely love them my life means that
I sometimes disregard my diet and it's
funny that's part of the reason why I've
had a lot of guests on this podcast
recently that talk about diet and health
and those kinds of things because I am
trying to make an active effort to be
more healthy to lose a little bit of
weight as well but to be more healthy
and the role that he'll plays in my life
is it means that in those moments where
sometimes I might reach for
you know junk Foods
having an option that is nutritionally
complete that is high in fiber that is
incredibly high in protein that has all
the vitamins and minerals that my body
needs within Arm's Reach that I can
consume on the go is where healing has
been a game changer for me
you talked about a crash earlier
while you were filming Top Gear yeah not
a very good driver me
36 years old 2006 I believe yeah um
take me to that day
well
um we'd had a discussion in the office
and I have told this story before and
then some people you might be bored of
it sorry
um
Andy Willman the editor had said he got
this chance for this car to be driven
and I'd gone into the office saying look
I just want to go really fast what's the
fastest we can go it's that dumb an idea
they came up with this car and I went to
drive and I turned up on the day
um did numerous runs in the thing uh it
was pretty basic and crude really quite
fast especially when you hit the
afterburner
um jet propelled dragster I didn't have
a speedo in the car because I knew I'd
be chasing speeds and that would be
dangerous so there was no Speedo I
didn't know how fast I was going until
after the event
um you stopped it to stop it from high
speed and to pull parachute chord to
stop the parachute came out and stopped
it
uh and I'd done all the days runs and
the director came over and said Rich
we've got I've got permission for one
last run
oh brilliant right
um we were happy with how it's gone but
let's get one more bag of shots and um
I was aware something had happened
uh I all I recall is a sense of oh no
um foot going towards a break and
realized I was doing three I didn't know
but I was doing 300 just shy 320 miles
an hour so breaks I don't do anything
um the car what had happened is the
front tire delaminated and blown
the card skewed right and was going off
row but it was still doing 290 miles an
hour as it started to roll I'd pull the
lever for the parachute which is all
that mattered to me when I finally you
know weeks or months later became aware
of what was happening I needed to know
had I done that because I looked at my
children and thought if I've nearly
denied you a father for the rest of your
lives because I'm an idiot and I did the
wrong thing I wouldn't forgive myself
but I did do the right thing so it just
it was never going to stop it so then it
went over and it rolled and as it went
over I knew you know there's no roof
just a roll bar
I didn't know how fast I was going but I
knew it was fast
um and I just thought well I'm gonna die
now
but it wasn't
again I'm on record of saying this and I
don't want to go on about it because I
get self-conscious I don't want anybody
to think oh stop going on about that and
I'm not but if you are interested I
found it interesting that there was no
fear associated with that there was no
don't know there was genuinely it was
answering a question that kind of at the
back of my mind had always wondered and
I think a lot of us do all of us when am
I gonna die how why and it was like oh
it's now that's the answer that's the
next thing to do that was it
and then I wasn't conscious again until
then I was conscious apparently when
they got to the car but I have no
recollection because the damage was done
brain decelerative sloshing forwards her
frontal lobe bleed because just
decelerating upside down using my head
as a Break
um it it isn't good for you
have you heard the story about
what was going on in your
your family at that time well while you
were unconscious in hospital
who called Mindy your wife yeah Mindy
was called
um she was on the road she was called by
uh Wellman
they all spoke it was hard my daughters
were
Young
and for them to grasp it was pretty
pretty difficult
um
yeah it's disruptive it's horrible and
it's hard
in my memories are all over the place
anyway because
um
I had very bad
um post-traumatic amnesia for weeks
like a one minute memory
which many my wife always says I was the
nicest I've ever been I was lovely
apparently I was perfectly happy
which does make me and has made me think
often since that you know I've got a
friend who's you know we all have
friends perhaps or ourselves whose
parents are
through whatever degenerative form of of
illness
losing memories
um and I always say to him is she happy
yeah fine
if I go to see them yes you'll come into
the pub to see me three or four times
and he's equally happy each time that's
all right doesn't matter
um and I was perfectly happy reading the
same newspaper every single day several
times a day I just it was by my bed I
just pick it up and oh brilliant I'll
sit down and read it put it down
minute later gone
until Mindy took it away because she was
sick of seeing me read it but it was it
was more distressing and really the
message there is yeah as if it's if
somebody is in that confused state of
whatever variety of whatever reason if
they're happy they're happy
then you're all you've got to do is cope
to support them in their happiness it
doesn't matter if they can't remember
who you are what anything is if they're
happy they're happy
and that's that
and I was
when you're in that coma I I watched the
video you produced about your um
incredibly powerful video about your
morphine dream
and uh the Crooked Tree on the hill
is that is that true that there was a
morphine you you yeah I was in a as we
held in coma because brain was expanding
post-crash so it was they were holding
me in coma but it was looking very very
bad and
um they had called Mindy in
um
and they said I think we we're losing
him
that he could do she said is there
anything I can do not really try
anything can I shout yeah so she roared
and shouted at me don't you dead I
really quite sweary and cross why did
you do that because she was crossed she
didn't want me to die
I think there's lots of people who've
done that I think I'd do that
but when all else is
tried and failed if somebody is lying
there yeah last resort
don't you dare because you know
she wanted me around
I think we'd all do that
it's not just a movie trope
you can you can you are calling to
somebody and I think we know in our
heart of hearts we do have a great deal
of Independence in terms of what happens
to us our mind is a powerful thing
um
mind and body are one
Chiropractic friend of mine chiropractor
he'll kill me with that osteopath a
friend of mine Steve sorry Steve
um obviously about very well read man
and we were talking about mind and body
as one
um and about you know bringing I was I
said something about bringing mind and
body to work together and all together
and he said well yeah well it is all one
because he's never been apart
oh yeah
your body and mind have never existed
separately they've only ever existed as
one and one needs the other and
compliments and one is the other
which is why
if in that coma State and it's only an
altered state of consciousness I'm Not
Dead
um I picked up on the emotion from Mindy
the anger
and thought as a dream the dream was
honestly all going to be in trouble now
it's not funny anymore it's a very
distinctive flavor of you know when
you're feeling you're being a bit
naughty and you're being cheeky you're
getting and then you're like oh no I
really am in trouble and that's when she
was really roaring and shouting and yes
her mind can do an awful lot with our
bodies there's enough evidence of that
your mind took you to your favorite
place
which gives me immense comfort
because it will do that eventually
anyway I know that's where I'll go and
given that
at the moment
of
dying of the body shutting down of it
stopping to do all the things that it
does
you're no longer tired by all those by
time
not biological rhythms lunar rhythms
none of those matter you're not beholden
to them anymore which is a kind of
Eternity so if my last thought I'd been
walking around that tree in I was up
there uh two weeks ago District yeah
went to the same tree
um
yeah my mind takes me around there and
that thought Echoes form of Eternity as
far as I'm concerned and really the
universe only exists as far as I'm
concerned or you're concerned it's only
your perception of it and if that last
moment is no longer constrained by
worrying about
Heartbeats or
cycling of the seasons
it's kind of an eternity isn't it
and I wouldn't mind hanging around by
that tree forever
what was happening in that dream so you
were you were in a coma and you have the
sort of a morphine induced dream where
you're walking up a hill yeah I was
walking up the hill towards a tree and I
was grew increasingly conscious that oh
I'm going to be in trouble for carrying
on no no I'm going to carry I just want
to press on and then as I reach the tree
it was a very clear oh no I really am
going to be in trouble I better go back
and that's the point
um I just related that story as a unit
to Minden it was very clear when I was
brought out of coma shortly after and
that's when it happened
I mean it could be a story I don't
forget your brain fills in things after
the fact a sense of recollection is all
you need for something to be in the past
it doesn't have to actually be in the
past
but I've I've retained
I've I've
gained immense comfort from it I find it
very comforting and warming to think so
I'll continue to think it
why is it comforting and warming to
think
cars
um
I think the question of what happens
since we we are aware of our own
mortality we're aware of the world and
we're aware that it's quite nice being
here to be aware of it
um and if that's one possible resolution
one possible that might be where it goes
that's all right by me
it's not the not the first time
um you had a car crash
well no no the last yeah I've read a lot
yes I went off a hill in Switzerland
yeah that was just again idiocy failed
to break at the Finish Line went off I
did think I was dying on that one after
that first major crash the one where you
were going 300 or 319 odd miles an hour
um did your risk appetite change
um
kind of no because
it was always assessed as risk I knew
there was risk and we had done
everything we could mitigate against
that the air ambulance came I was saved
um no it has done more laterally but
that's because I'm getting older I think
um
no it didn't really radically change it
but you came
remarkably close to your two young girls
not having a father does and and getting
close to that reality must leave some
kind of
perspective change or some kind of
it would certainly make me think about
the prospect
um and maybe start planning differently
or
possibly did that but then
getting older does that passing 40
passing 50 does that it's in line with
everything else that's ever happened in
my life it doesn't really stand out
massively it did for a while but it
doesn't stand out as a particularly
that's or hang everything on that
because there's also passing 40 there's
there's all those other Milestones that
we all have and processes that we go
through and
subtle and not so subtle shifts in our
priorities needs
that happens it's just that's just woven
into the fabric of my life and it's just
one couple of stitches in it after the
crash
um you experienced depression
yeah I mean I was told Mindy was told by
the doctors that a frontal lobe brain
injury
would
possibly lead to me having a greater
propensity for Obsession compulsion
depression paranoia Mindy left a pause
my wife and just he didn't meet him
before the Christ
which is quite funny to me it's quite a
good line
um
yeah I think I did suffer a bit I'd
suffered all of those things to a degree
yeah
in so much as I became aware of them as
a thing because I could feel them from
the inside and see through them to the
outside so yeah I was aware of them
all of those things Obsession compulsion
paranoia yeah
depression yeah what was what were the
symptoms of that that made you realize
that it was a reality for you
um how are you different or what did you
feel some of them were really weird
moments like and I still get an echo of
it I remember having been
institutionalized for a long time in
hospitals and and actually in recovery
when I thought I was free I was I was
still being monitored and I was still
being carefully guided but when I was
really free I would have I'd be coming
into London to do something and I could
open the Wardrobe door and just look at
all the shirts and just trying to work
out oh it was too much
Choice was a problem I found Choice
really difficult
for quite a long time
but also I'm feeling your emotions
derailed or interfered with
as a result of what is only a
neurochemical imbalance that's all we're
talking about is chemicals and
electricity I was walking across
my drive of my house and I felt this
sudden dwelling upsurge of love in my
chest what's that this is not that long
out of oh still on the road to recovery
I suppose and eventually identified I'd
walk past my old Land Rover which I do
love but only because I quite like it
it's an Orlando but it just triggered
this absolutely I thought blimey
um
it made me think and if emotions can be
that profoundly affected by what was
just a mix-up of chemicals and
electricity in my head then I am more
aware of I don't listen to my emotions
too closely if I'm very very tired or if
I've had a big night out with the boys
the night before if I've drunk red wine
I do not tune in to see what I think
about anything because it's irrelevant
for a day
um those are the rules I've been quite
lucky for that reason that I've had that
slightly more objective look
at my own self
on the instructional cell phone myself
on that route to recovery what was was
their hottest day well you look back and
go that was the the most challenging for
myself in Mindy and
other alerts anger was there was I was
angry for a while really massive the
anger is a problem in people recovering
from brain injury the weirdest thing
though I've chatted to so many people
who've recovered from acquired brain
injury acquired in so many different
ways from being shot
to falling off a ladder to a car crash
whatever
um and the similarities are astonishing
in the road to recovery really are
the confusions the weaknesses
the slight
it's not guilt I mean I wanted a t-shirt
on the front said I'm okay stop asking
and on the back that said I'm still
poorly you know because you it's it's if
you run for a bus
for a while since you ran for a bus but
if one were to run for a bus and you
twist your ankle and you sort of carry
on running on the I'm all right
it's a bit like that with what I'd done
but of course what I'd injured was it
was me
where I am
and how I see where I am
there's a horrible circularity to that
type of injuring Alpha I had a close
friend who again was similarly injured
falling off a horse
because he's an idiot
um
and again massive similarities they're a
more different man you couldn't imagine
he has dignity status gravitas great
family everything I'm not but his
experience of recovery very very similar
are there any remnants of the accident
in in terms of injuries or probably but
there's probably remnants of everything
that's happened to you in your life and
everything's happened to me and mine are
you aware of any is Mindy aware of any
no
um I worry I do worry about my memory
because it's not brilliant
my working memory is very large my sort
of processing memory in the moment so I
can still read a page of script and
deliver it
but my longer term
not brilliant I have to consciously
write memories down and work hard to
recall them sometimes now that might be
because I'm 50. it might be a bit or 53
might be because I'm working a lot and
I'm tired it might be the onset of
something else
do you worry about that yeah
I do
probably have a look find out
probably should
um
are you scared to find out yeah
yeah because you know it was a bleed on
the front
it could mean there's an increased risk
I don't know I need to find out
and so I've done I'm just I have been
too scared to do it but I do need to I
need to um
I need to do it really on the way here I
had to stop off
um for a medical when you're doing a
production you'll know you have to have
a medical
which always has been involved in any
accidents
I can have another piece of paper please
I'm still going
um
very nice doctor and at the end I said
yeah I should definitely um I need to
put myself in one of those midlife mots
to see if everything's okay
and I wanted to say
and to check there's nothing going awry
up here
but I just I'm chickened out
didn't
bad news I probably need an MRI scan
but at 53 you know your memory does
start to get a bit
they call it lost key syndrome the
doctors did when I first came home from
brain injury
and they have it with a lot of patience
because you know they would lose their
keys and go into an absolute flat
tailspin Panic oh no I've lost my keys
it's right now you've just lost your
keys it happens I am quite forgetful I'm
generally not paying attention generally
thinking about something else the next
thing and therefore I do drop the ball I
forget stuff I lose stuff I forget keys
but that's just that's just me that's
not a function of something going wrong
show him
isn't it such a peculiar thing that
humans will
avoid finding out something if they
think there's potentially bad news on
the end of it I was reading some I think
some crazy study I was reading about
over Christmas when I was writing um
about how if someone is diagnosed with
breast cancer at work
um and they're in close proximity to you
you're less likely to go and get a
checkup
really yeah which is counter to what we
would imagine was that you would assume
but it's this avoidance of discomfort
the psychological discomfort associate
with finding out bad news and I am
I had a procrastination expert on the
podcast Once Upon a Time and he said
whenever you're procrastinating on
something it's because there's some sort
of psychological discomfort associated
with the activity an essay you don't
feel competent about so you end up just
doing the dishes all day or whatever it
might be so when you're procrastinating
you've got to ask yourself that question
what is the psychological discomfort
here that I'm trying to avoid so I'm
asking you Richard
what is the psychological discomfort
you're trying to avoid and why they're
quite simply facing something I wouldn't
want to face it's my own Doom it's all
that it's
um I would
find it very difficult to talk to my
family and say right this is what's
coming
I know I'd be all right
as I've said if you in a confused state
it doesn't bother you but I'd feel bad
putting that on them yeah I want them to
have a future full of of Hope and
Clarity and
energy and vigor and potential and fun
and I don't want to
interrupt that
That's Heavy yeah
it's interesting you know this
conversation about like health anxiety
um I think it's one worth having and
trying to get to a solution on because
whether it's that or whether it's a lump
I feel somewhere or whether it's a
testicle that's a bit of a strange shape
or whatever it might be that we do a lot
of us live with this health anxiety of
like if I just ignore it then uh it's
not not a thing but then obviously
ignoring it with many ailments causes it
to measure things
yeah
but it's not surprising that we don't
want to face it surely not it's it's I
mean logic requires a procrastination
expert who I did hear and I have heard
him on on the radio as well and I always
laugh about whether it turns out
obviously
um
the science of procrastination
but I don't think it requires that to
realize of course we don't want to know
we're aware of ourselves we're aware of
the fact that we're aware of the world
and we enjoy that process
daffodils doesn't have to stand around
worrying about being a daffodil it just
is a daffodil
I think as you get older you can make
that process easier I do find you know
practicing a bit of mindfulness or
thinking about things asking about
things talking about things can make it
easier
and you don't have to imagine a world
without you in because you won't be in
it
so you are only in your world for as
long as you're in it and that's eternity
as far as you're concerned have you
spoken to Mindy about that anxiety yeah
I've got any health yeah so it's not an
elephant in the room no no no
and she's pushed you to go get checked
doesn't you yeah probably should yeah
yeah I will
if anything it does demonstrate that we
are much more emotional and a lot less
logical than we think we are you know
because the logical decision be I have a
lump I should go get it checked but yes
humans tend to go
I mean they're often just Google it and
convince themselves they have something
even worse or they just avoid avoid I
mean you don't want to show weakness and
that again it's perfectly normal but my
well both my daughters and my wife
they're all into horses but my youngest
daughter Willow our horse was was unwell
and she pointed she pointed out to me
that they have evolved to be incredibly
good at masking pain and discomfort
because they're a herd animal
if they're not in the herd they die so
they need to hide it they need yeah I'm
watching one of the lads here I am I'm
fine yeah I run with you over there and
they will do because that's her only
chance of survival at the moment that's
oh I'm feeling a bit crooked so I might
stay here
I'm not saying we're horses no but it's
a great analogy and one I think I can
relate to
you know being a CEO and always being
the leader yeah you've got to you've got
to be I'm fine I'm fine yeah
what have you masked
oh
god
um
insecurity not being sure of the way
forwards
also simply tiredness but I quite enjoy
that I enjoy being up first
dumb but I like it if I've got people
if we are all away with work and we're
all staying together I like to be up
first go for a run
partly to signal to myself
Rich you're more important than all of
this and that's important and partly to
signal
to them that no Young
don't worry I got this I've not only got
this I've got this before I've got this
so we'll be fine
what um like that injured horse analogy
is there anything that you've masked
that you've masked because you'd think
it would be
a weakness I know I certainly have I
reflect on it especially in my career
when I was younger
when I was struggling I would not I
wouldn't tell a person because I did
couldn't believe that a CEO and a man
could possibly
um Express that so
but that's different now surely I think
it is far easier I mean I think you know
a patriarchal society and all the
stereotypes and tropes contained within
it I've done just as much damage to men
in many ways different damage but that
inability to share that inability to
show I think that has changed or is
changing although I have to be very
carefully because I live in the frightly
nice middle class bubble and I've fallen
foul in this before because I live in a
very happy world where there is no in my
little world there is no racism
homophobia sexism bullying it's nice and
then it's easy to forget and then you
say things based on that and then you
look at the broader world and realize oh
hang on a minute that really isn't doing
much for the situation of somebody
living here or coping with that so but I
think on the whole it's easier now to
share things
was there a point where you you've you
can recall opening up and the and the
positive consequence of opening up in a
way that you maybe haven't before
because I can think of times where for
the first time ever I've just said to my
partner look I gotta tell you something
this is how I'm feeling about this and
old Steve never would have done that he
would have been too too much of a tough
guy he would have seen it as just a
tremendous weakness
I I can't remember when that happens I
know I mean I'm off up to the Lake
District this weekend and I will see Les
my oldest mate is a Shepherd up there an
AED who runs the bridge and my two
brothers are coming with me and we're
gonna have a sort of supper on them
Saturday evening and we're gonna cook
and it is the most natural thing in the
world for that's
five four very disparate people with
very disparate jobs as a head teacher
stock broker a television presenter
businessman a man running a hotel and a
shepherd
but we will
will share things very happily
and it feels the most natural thing in
the world it doesn't feel like oh no
let's be really serious and let's share
our animals feelings and let's be
supportive and not now we will do is
just and it can be knock about it
doesn't have to be artificially gentle
and and all on a bed of cotton wool we
can still take the piss we can still
have a laugh but we are doing it with
love we are
we need that yeah
oh yeah yeah
very definitely men especially men more
so because they're useless at it and
realizing that these things have value
and it's okay and it doesn't mean you
have to turn into something you don't
want to turn into or change you as a
person I have a really rugged chats with
oh my mates from forces often soldiers
are pretty good at it nowadays
ex-military yeah fess up to how you feel
why not
nothing to be ashamed of you're
beautiful young daughters Isabel and
Willow hmm
they turned to you and they say Dad what
what um what advice would you give me on
living a a full
content happy life
all right they just asked me for money
I would I would say
um I've got a
beautiful picture here that I found oh
that is them on the Internet bless them
that's after doing some show rather yeah
that is them
I would say
well they already are in a way they make
wise decisions they're clever Willow had
got into the youngest she'd got into a
couple of good universities to do
psychology she loved it she's interested
in it she's bright but both are
um
but she's got a bit quiet about it we
said what's up he said well I'll do the
psychology but we know the only thing
I've really been passionate about is
horses and Matt is equestrian
and I don't want to get five years from
now and think oh I could have done it I
said no you're absolutely right and if
there's one piece of luck you need to
take advantage of it so I'm not I can
afford to look after you for a bit
longer so if you want to go and explore
it and then in five years time you'll be
able to say yeah I did it or I did it
and failed that's better than not so
they're already thinking quite wisely
about their Futures what does that group
that picture mean to you in terms of the
people in it
um
they're the most important people in my
world but I've been taken away I've
taken myself away from them too much
over the years
in order to
support them
but actually the support they needed
sometimes was me being there and that's
the hardest thing and I can't undo that
and there's me saying I have no regrets
um
I
regrets are funny I don't feel it as a
real pain I wish I could go back and
change it because I know I can't
so I simply don't feel it in that way
but I do wish I'd found a way of being
there with and for them more just as me
rather than as me being away
in a jungle but on a glacier earning
lots of money and sending it home
and Mindy yeah I'll include Mindy in
that
they all reach out to me when I go home
yeah
but they're the reason you know
the reason I do it
and that is the truth
you've been through a lot with Mindy a
lot she's been through a lot with me
poor thing we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
asks a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're leaving it for the
question that's been left for you is
what is the single greatest piece of
advice that you have ever been given
oh
um single greatest piece of advice I've
ever been given
and I've known some really wise people
Tim Jackson who is my boss at Renault we
lost him last year
absolutely tremendous man
and he
he would have given me lots of advice
because he was
I mean it was to it was to Tim Jackson
actually that I'd I'd broken out of
radio because I was starving to death
and realized I was never going to get to
make Motoring
TV shows based in a bed set somewhere in
the north I needed to get down to where
the work was so I got a job at Renault
UK in the Press office and my boss there
was Tim Jackson he was a PR director and
just the loveliest man
he only gave me the job because during
the interview he'd been he realized I
was wearing a pair of shoes I had
buckles and laces and he'd draw them
throughout the interview he said to his
secret look at that I think we're giving
the job he told me to to follow it it
sounds really cheesy and I don't wanna I
don't want to dress it up and follow my
heart but I knew I resigned twice
because I got the job for a bit of TV
work
uh I actually did I filmed the review of
my company car sent off to Pete Baker
and he said yeah okay well I can't
promise you a lot of work but I'll give
you some so I had to leave Renault so I
went back to Tim and said Tim I'm going
and tears in my eyes when I said it we
were both heartbroken because we I
really enjoyed working with them and in
fact I went back in end of that week and
said no I can't go I'm staying but then
I went back in on the Monday and said no
I am going and he absolutely said you've
got to go with it you have to follow it
while you can and I think that applies
to everything and anything
because you won't always be able to
and maybe that's
maybe that that's what it distills down
to if you're thinking should I do this
what can you do that at this and might
there come a time when you can't in
which case you should
and that's sort of what camera can have
what I had with that quite teary
conversation over an egg sandwich one
morning with Tim Jackson 20 odd years
ago
Richard thank you so much thank you to
meet you um
yeah right thank you no but it's you're
incredible for so many reasons not least
because because of your success and
everything but really you're a
remarkable Communicator some someone
I've really learned a lot from in that
department communication telling stories
and keeping someone engaged through
vivid language and and your sort of
tonal expression it's really remarkable
and you've lived a life which is
incredibly inspiring so thank you so
much for the inspiration it means a a
huge honor to meet you today and have
the opportunity to have this
conversation with you I was tremendously
excited and you've over delivered and
then some in terms of everything I was
hoping this conversation could be so
thank you thank you for your kind words
and I enjoyed it and I look forward to
seeing the next one thank you foreign
[Music]
you got to the end of this podcast
whenever someone gets to the end of this
podcast I feel like I owe them a greater
debt of gratitude because that means you
listen to the whole thing and hopefully
that suggests that you enjoyed it if you
are at the end and you enjoyed this
podcast could you do me a little bit of
a favor and hit that subscribe button
that's one of the clearest indicators we
have that this episode was a good
episode and we look at that on all of
the episodes to see which episodes
generated the most subscribers
thank you so much and I'll see you again
next time